Friar. 
The grey-ey'd morn smiles on the frowning night, 
Chequering the eastern clouds with streaks of light; 
And flecked darkness like a drunkard reels 
From forth day's path and Titan's fiery wheels: 
Non, ere the sun advance his burning eye, 
The day to cheer and night's dank dew to dry, 
I must up-fill this osier cage of ours 
With baleful weeds and precious-juiced flowers. 
The earth, that's nature's mother, is her tomb; 
What is her burying gave, that is her womb: 
And from her womb children of divers kind 
We sucking on her natural bosom find; 
Many for many virtues excellent, 
None but for some, and yet all different. 
O, mickle is the powerful grace that lies 
In plants, herbs, stones, and their true qualities: 
For naught so vile that on the earth doth live 
But to the earth some special good doth give; 
Nor aught so good but, strain'd from that fair use, 
Revolts from true birth, stumbling on abuse: 
Virtue itself turns vice, being misapplied; 
And vice sometimes by action dignified. 
Within the infant rind of this small flower 
Poison hath residence, and medicine power: 
For this, being smelt, with that part cheers each part; 
Being tasted, slays all senses with the heart. 
Two such opposed kings encamp them still 
In man as well as herbs,--grace and rude will; 
And where the worser is predominant, 
Full soon the canker death eats up that plant.
[Enter Romeo.]
Romeo. 
Good morrow, father!
Friar. 
Benedicite! 
What early tongue so sweet saluteth me?-- 
Young son, it argues a distemper'd head 
So soon to bid good morrow to thy bed: 
Care keeps his watch in every old man's eye, 
And where care lodges sleep will never lie; 
But where unbruised youth with unstuff'd brain 
Doth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth reign: 
Therefore thy earliness doth me assure 
Thou art uprous'd with some distemperature; 
Or if not so, then here I hit it right,-- 
Our Romeo hath not been in bed to-night.
Romeo. 
That last is true; the sweeter rest was mine.
Friar. 
God pardon sin! wast thou with Rosaline?